# Summary of project

Startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

In order to enable Sparkify to parse and analyze their data in a distributed manner, a Spark ETL Pipeline was created, which reads the data stored inside S3.

# How to run

*To run this project in local mode*, create a file `dl.cfg`  with the following data:

```
KEY=YOUR_AWS_ACCESS_KEY
SECRET=YOUR_AWS_SECRET_KEY
```

Create an S3 Bucket named `data-lake-output-data` where output results will be stored.

Finally, run the following command:

`python etl.py`

# Project structure

The files found at this project are the following:

- dl.cfg - File with AWS credentials.
- etl.py - Python script that extracts songs and log data from S3, transforms it using Spark, and loads the dimensional tables created in parquet format back to S3 backet.
- README.md - Current file, contains detailed information about the project.


# Source Data

The data  is queried from s3 buckets hosten at AWS. The data is divided into 2 datasets (Song datasets and Log datasets)

- **Song datasets**: all json files are nested in subdirectories under *s3a://udacity-dend/song_data*. A sample of this files is:

```
{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}
```

- **Log datasets**: all json files are nested in subdirectories under *s3a://udacity-dend/log_data*. A sample of a single row of each files is:

```
{"artist":"Slipknot","auth":"Logged In","firstName":"Aiden","gender":"M","itemInSession":0,"lastName":"Ramirez","length":192.57424,"level":"paid","location":"New York-Newark-Jersey City, NY-NJ-PA","method":"PUT","page":"NextSong","registration":1540283578796.0,"sessionId":19,"song":"Opium Of The People (Album Version)","status":200,"ts":1541639510796,"userAgent":"\"Mozilla\/5.0 (Windows NT 6.1) AppleWebKit\/537.36 (KHTML, like Gecko) Chrome\/36.0.1985.143 Safari\/537.36\"","userId":"20"}
```


The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

# Database Schema Design

In order to enable Sparkify to analyze their data, a Relational Database Schema was created, which can be filled with an ETL pipeline.

The so-called star scheme enables the company to view the user behaviour over several dimensions.
The fact table is used to store all user song activities that contain the category "NextSong". Using this table, the company can relate and analyze the dimensions users, songs, artists and time.

* **Fact Table**: songplays
* **Dimension Tables**: users, songs, artists and time.

# ETL pipeline

1. Load credentials
2. Read data from S3 buckets hosten at AWS
    - Song data: `s3://udacity-dend/song_data`
    - Log data: `s3://udacity-dend/log_data`

    The script reads song_data and load_data from S3.

3. Process data using spark

    Transforms them to create five different tables listed under `Dimension Tables and Fact Table`.
    Each table includes the right columns and data types. Duplicates are addressed where appropriate.

4. Load it back to S3

    Writes them to partitioned parquet files in table directories on S3.

    Each of the five tables are written to parquet files in a separate analytics directory on S3. Each table has its own folder within the directory. Songs table files are partitioned by year and then artist. Time table files are partitioned by year and month. Songplays table files are partitioned by year and month.


